# data

This folder contains all of the data needed to run analyses/Analyses.Rmd and analyses/Plots.Rmd
All of these data files were generated by preprocessing.Preprocessing.Rmd. See the README in the preprocessing folder for details on how the data was created.

## bird_data.csv
A dataframe with a row for every individual bird species from each language, structured as follows:

-   Language - the names of the languages where the bird naming data is from.
-   Canonical Name - we have used Clements 2023 scientific names for our canonical names. Duplicate bird species have a suffix.
-   IndexFG - indices for each folk category.
-   n - number of birds in the folk category
-   ScientificName2023 & ScientificName1974 - Names in the Clements 2023 and 1974 taxonomies. 
-   BeakLengthCulmen, BeakLengthNares, BeakWidth, BeakDepth, TarsusLength, WingLength, KippsDistance, Secondary, HandWingIndex, TailLength, Mass - Measurements from AVONET (Tobias et al., 2022) downloaded from <https://opentraits.org/datasets/avonet.html>.
-   IsoPer/zIsoPer - unscaled and scaled perceptual isolation scores for each bird, calculated by finding the Euclidean distance between each bird and its closest neighbour based on the scaled and log-transformed AVONET variables. See the preprocessing file for details.
-   VarPer - variance for each folk category of birds based on IsoPer scores.
-   IsoPhy/zIsoPhy - unscaled and scaled phylogenetic isolation scores for each bird, calculated by taking cophenetic distance between each bird and its closest bird in a phylogenetic tree. See preprocessing file for details.
-   VarPhy - variance for each folk category of birds based on IsoPhy scores.
-   Iso23/zIso23 & Iso74/zIso74 - unscaled and scaled isolation variables for each of the two Western scientific taxonomies, calculated by counting up the steps of the taxonomic tree until the bird and its closest bird share a taxon. See preprocessing file for details.
-   CommonName - from the Clements 2023 taxonomy
-   Genus2023/Family2023/Order2023 & Genus1974/Family1974/Order1974 - genuses, families and orders from Clements taxonomies
-   ScientificNameV3 - names from the BirdLife V3 taxonomy, with some small changes to align with the phylogenetic trees. Details at Jetz et al. (2012).
-   tsne1per/tsne2per - coordinates for dimension reduction. These coordinates were generated in preprocessing/Preprocessing.Rmd
-   cBlack, cWhite, cYellow, cBlue, cRed, cGreen, cElaboration, cDiversity, zcElaboration, zcDiversity - colour variables from Santangeli (2023)  <https://figshare.com/s/5602ec236f40db0eb162?file=42156828>. zcDiversity and zcElaboration are scaled.
-   IsoCol/zIsoCol - unscaled and scaled colour isolation scores for each bird, calculated by finding the Euclidean distance between each bird and its closesnt neighbour based on the colour variables. See preprocessing file for details.

## per_matrix_[language].csv
Distance matrices for all of the birds species in each language based on the AVONET features

## phylo-matrix_[language].csv
Distance matrices for all of the birds species in each language based on the phylogenetic trees

## phylo-tree_[language].nex
Nexus files for phylogenetic trees for each language

## Predictions_nb.csv
Predictions from negative binomial models predicting companion count, generated in analyses/Analyses.Rmd

## Predictions_tnb.csv
Predictions from truncated negative binomial models predicting companion count from a subset of the data with n=1 categories removed, generated in analyses/Analyses.Rmd

## Similarity_[language].csv
A pairwise list of all bird pair combinations in the folk taxonomy, structured as follows:

-   Species1/Species2 - The scientific names of the two birds in the pair.
-   SameName - a logical column indicating whether a pair of birds has the same name in the folk taxonomy.
-   DistPer/zDistPer - unscaled and scaled perceptual distances between birds based on AVONET variables
-   DistPhy/zDistPhy - unscaled and scaled phylogenetic distances between birds
-   Dist23/zDist23 & Dist74/zDist74 - unscaled and scaled distances between birds in Clements taxonomy
-   DistCol/zDistCol - unscaled and scaled distances between birds based on colour variables.

## tree_23_[language].nex & tree_74_[language]
Nexus files for creating dendrograms for linnaean taxonomies for each language based on the 1974 and 2023 Clements taxnomies.